% A Good Story
% Daniel Waterworth
% January 12, 2018

Here is an excerpt from "Art & Fear" by David Bayles and Ted Orland that I
first read on codinghorror[^1]:

> The ceramics teacher announced on opening day that he was dividing the
> class into two groups. All those on the left side of the studio, he said,
> would be graded solely on the quantity of work they produced, all those
> on the right solely on its quality. His procedure was simple: on the
> final day of class he would bring in his bathroom scales and weigh the
> work of the "quantity" group: fifty pound of pots rated an "A", forty
> pounds a "B", and so on. Those being graded on "quality", however,
> needed to produce only one pot - albeit a perfect one - to get an "A".
>
> Well, came grading time and a curious fact emerged: the works of highest
> quality were all produced by the group being graded for quantity. It
> seems that while the "quantity" group was busily churning out piles of
> work - and learning from their mistakes - the "quality" group had sat
> theorizing about perfection, and in the end had little more to show for
> their efforts than grandiose theories and a pile of dead clay.
>
> > Art & Fear: Observations On the Perils (and Rewards) of Artmaking

When I read this for the first time, I found it deeply satifying, but I never
stopped to consider why. Looking at it now, it seems to me that this excerpt
has many of the makings of a great story.

When I was in school, we were taught that stories have a beginning, a middle
and an end. Later, we were taught that stories have a setup, a dialemma or
point of tension and a resolution.

Well, it certainly has those points.

 1. There are two ceramics classes,
 2. One class is graded on quantity and the other on quality,
 3. The quantity class produced better quality,

So it passes the school "is it a story?" test, but what makes it a great story
instead of just a story is that it makes counter-intuitive assertions about the
world.

Stories are tools to train your intuition. Or said another way, people learn
best when the content is presented as a story. Or said yet another way,
**Stories are peoples' native learning language.**

So, the next time you want to teach someone something, why not use a story?

*And if you wish to improve your story telling skills, take a look at[^2]*

[^1]: [Quantity Always Trumps Quality](https://blog.codinghorror.com/quantity-always-trumps-quality/)
[^2]: [Pixar - Online Story Telling Course](https://www.khanacademy.org/partner-content/pixar/storytelling)
