% Bifurcation
% Daniel Waterworth
% February 8, 2018

First, some troubling data:

![graph showing household income not keeping pace with gdp per capita in
us since 1999](../images/household_income.png)

This graph is explained by the book "Average is Over: Powering America
Beyond the Age of the Great Stagnation", in which Tyler Cowen argues
that the economy is in the process of bifurcating into those who are
able to effectively utilize technology and those who aren't.

In this dystopian future:

> a small minority [who are] highly educated and capable of working
> collaboratively with automated systems will become a wealthy
> aristocracy; the vast majority will earn little or nothing, surviving
> on low-priced goods created by the first group, living in shantytowns
> working with highly automated production systems.

> [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Average_is_Over)

Is this future inevitable? I want to argue that it isn't. I do
agree that the economy is spliting, but I disagree on an important
presupposition.

Cowen assumes that this group of technocrati must necessarily be small
and this makes sense if you believe that the economy is bounded. With
only so much of the pie to go around and with so few able to create so
much, few succeed.

But, if the economy is unbounded, and opportunities to create new kinds of
value will always be present, then this assumption is wrong. There is no
bound on the number of technocrats, but that still leaves one rather large
problem.

How does one become a technocrat?

Well, a technocrat, in this context, is someone who is capable of
utilizing technology for there own ends. So, becoming a technocrat
means learning to wield technology. The obvious way to do this is to
learn to program, but it is not the only way.

Before industrial agriculture, farmers were the ones who created the
value in the world, but they weren't the only ones who benefited from
their work. In the feudal age, farmers worked for lords who controlled
the balance of power.

**We are in another feudal age now, where programmers are the new
farmers.** So, to be a part of the new economy, you must be employ or be
a 'programmer' (where a 'programmer' is just someone who is able to make
a computer do arbitrary things).
