% The Risk Economy
% Daniel Waterworth
% January 25, 2018

Let's start with an observation:

*There are two kinds of things you can do. You can do something that's been
done before or you can do something that's never been done.*

**Doing something that has been done before is low-risk.** After a
factory has produced a million pens, you can be quite sure that it can
produce the million and first.

**Doing something that you've never done is higher-risk.** If you've
never painted a portrait and you need to paint a good one before a
deadline, you may not succeed.

**But doing something that no-one has done before is the
highest-risk.** The first person to climb Everest took a greater risk
than the second person.

Here's another observation: when you hire an employee, the employee is
doing two things:

 1. They are doing work,
 2. They are taking risks,

If you instruct your employee to build a wall, the work that they do has
been effectively delegated as you no longer need to build a wall.

But the risks that your employee has taken have not been delegated. If
your employee, in the course of building the wall, decided to use a
different kind of brick, they took a risk. Since you are now the
owner of the wall, you took a risk too.

For this reason, whether it is articuated this way or not, employees are
trained to be risk averse.

The last observation I have to make is this: The important, valuable work
in the world is high-risk. Low-risk work can be automated and done by
machines, but risk-taking cannot be automated. If a machine takes a risk
under your command, then so do you.

If you want to learn to do valuable things, you must learn to take risks.
